Tom and his friends

"Tom! Tom! Where are you?'
No answer.
‘Where is that boy? When I find him, I'm going to..."
Aunt Polly looked under the bed. Then she opened the
door and looked out into the garden.

"Tom!

She heard something behind her. A small boy ran past,
but Aunt Polly put out her hand and stopped him.

"Ah, there you are! And what's that in your pocket?

‘Nothing, Aunt Polly.’

= f= es 5 ~

Aunt Polly put out her hand and stopped him.


‘Nothing! It's an apple! I can see it. Now listen, Tor
Those apples are not for you, and I —'

'Oh, Aunt Polly! Quick - look behind you!’

So Aunt Polly looked, and Tom was out of the hou:
in a second. She laughed quietly. 'I never learn. I love th
Tom, my dead sister's child, but he isn't an easy boy fi
an old lady. Well, it's Saturday tomorrow and there's r
school, but it isn't going to be a holiday for Tom. Oh n«
He's going to work tomorrow!’

=

Saturday was a beautiful day. It was summer and the su

was hot and there were flowers in all the gardens. It we:
a day for everybody to be happy.

Tom and his friends

Tom came out of his house with a brush and a big pot
of white paint in his hand. He looked at the fence; it was
three metres high and thirty metres long. He put his brush
in the paint and painted some of the fence. He did it
again. Then he stopped and looked at the fence, put down
his brush and sat down. There were hours of work in
front of him and he was the unhappiest boy in the village.

After ten minutes Tom had an idea, a wonderful idea.
He took up the brush
again and began work.
He saw his friend Joe
Harper in the street,
but he didn't look at
him. Joe had an apple
in his hand. He came up
to Tom and looked at
the fence.

'T am sorry, Tom.'

Tom said nothing.
The paint brush moved "Iam sorry, Tom,’ said Joe,
up and down.

‘Working for your aunt?" said Joe. 'I'm going down to
the river. I'm sorry you can't come with me.’

Tom put down his brush. "You call this work?" he said.

Tainting a fence? said joe. 'Of course it's work!’

"Perhaps it is and perhaps it isn't. But I like it,’ said


Tom. 'T can go to the river any day. I can't paint a fer
very often.’

Joe watched Tom for about five minutes. T¢
painted very slowly and carefully. He often stopp:
moved back from the fence and looked at his work w
a smile. Joe began to get very interested, and said:

"Tom, can I paint a little?’

Tom thought for a second. I'm sorry, Joe. You s
my aunt wants me to do it because I'm good at paintii
My brother Sid wanted to paint, too, but she said no

'Oh, please, Tom, just a little. I'm good at paintii
too. Hey, do you want some of my apple?

'No, Joe, Ican't —'

'OK, you can have all my apple!"

Tom gave Joe the brush. He did not smile, but for t

Tomwas the richest boy in St Petersburg.
1ce

Tow and his friends

first time that day he was a very happy boy. He sat down
and ate Joe's apple.

More friends came to laugh at Tom, but soon they all
wanted to paint, too. By the afternoon Tom had three
balls, an old knife, a cat with one eye, an old blue bottle,
and a lot of other exciting things. He was the richest boy
in St Petersburg, and the fence - all thirty metres of it -
was a beautiful white. He went back to the house.

"Aunt Polly! Can I go and play now?"

Aunt Polly came out of the house to look. When she
saw the beautiful white fence, she was very pleased. She
took Tom into the house and gave him an apple.

"Well, you can go and play. But don't come home late.’

Tom quickly took a second apple and ran off.

~~



On Monday morning Tom didn't want to go to scho
but Aunt Polly got him out of bed, and then out of t
house. In the street near the school he met his frie
Huckleberry Finn. Huck had no mother, and his fath
drank whiskey all the time, so Huck lived in the stree
He didn't go to school, he was always dirty, and he nex
had a new shirt. But he was happy. The mothers, of
Petersburg didn't like Huck, but Tom and his friends d

"Hello, Huck!" said Tom. "What have you got ther:

'A dead cat.’

"What're you going to do with it?" asked Tom.

Tm going to take it to the graveyard tonight," Hu
said. 'At midnight. A dead cat can call ghosts out
their graves.

T never heard that," said Tom. 'Is it true?’

"Well, IT don't know," said Huck. 'Old Mrs Hopki
told me. Come with me, and see. Or are you afre
of ghosts?’

'Of course not!" said Tom. 'Come and meow for 1
at my window at eleven o'clock.’

After this, Tom was late for school, and the teach
looked at him angrily.

"Thomas Sawyer, why are you late again?’ he said.

Tom began to speak, and then stopped. There was
new girl in the schoolroom - a beautiful girl with bl

eyes and long yellow hair. Tom looked and looked.
vol,
the
end
her
ets.
ver
f St
lid.

re?

nck
of

lue

A dead cat can call ghosts out of their graves.’

Oh, how beautiful she was! And in two seconds Tom
was in love! He must sit next to her. But how?

In the girls’ half of the room there was only one empty
chair, and it was next to the new girl. Tom thought
quickly, and then looked at the teacher.

'l stopped to talk with Huckleberry Tinn!' he said.

The teacher was very, very angry. Boys were often late
for school. That was bad, but talking with Huckleberry


The teacher took
his stick ...

Finn was worse, m
worse! The teacher tool
stick, and two minutes 1
Tom's trousers were °
hot and the teacher's
was very tired.

‘Now, Tom Sawyer,
go and sit with the girls

Some of the chilc
laughed. Tom walked to
chair next to the new
sat down and opened
book. The other chile
began to work again.

After ten minutes, the
looked up. There was
apple on the table in fror
her. She put it back
Tom's half of the table

minute later the apple was in front of her again. No

stayed. Next, Tom drew a picture of a house and p

in front of her.

"That's nice,’ the girl said. 'Now draw a man.’

Tom drew a man next to the house. The man

taller than the house, and he had very big hands and

long legs. But the girl liked him.
Tom and his friends

much 'Can you draw me now?’ she asked.

ok his Tom drew a girl next to the man.

s later "You draw beautifully. I can't draw pictures.’
> very- 'T can teach you,’ said Tom. 'After school.’

s arm 'Oh, please!’

"What's your name?’ Tom asked.

T, you ‘Becky. Becky Thatcher.’
rls!" Just then Tom felt a hand on his head. It was the
ildren teacher. He took Tom by_the ear and moved him back to

to the his chair in the boys’ half of the room.
w girl,
ed his

1ildren

he girl
as an
ont of
ck on
ble. A
Now it

put it

n was

d very

7

Crm
- Ls

In the graveyard

That night Tom went to bed at half past nine. He wai
for Huck's meow, and at eleven o'clock it came.
climbed quietly out of the bedroom window, and tl
he and Huck walked out of the village with the dead

The graveyard was on a hill, about a mile from
Petersburg. When the boys got there, they put the d
cat on a grave, and sat down behind some trees. Tl
watched, and waited. It was very dark, and very qui

"Do you see that new grave there?" whispered Hu
That's Hoss Williams’ grave, He died last week.

"Perhaps he can hear us," Tom whispered back. '
you think he can, Huck?”'

'T don't know, but [—'

‘Sh!’

'Oh, Tom, what is it?’

'Sh!” whispered Tom. 'I can see something. Look!

Huck moved nearer to Tom. ‘Ghosts! he said. 'Th
of them! They're coming here, Tom! Oh, let's go hon

"They can't see us," Tom whispered. 'Not here.’

‘Ghosts can see through trees," said Huck unhappi
"They can see through everything!"

The ghosts moved quietly through the graveyard a
ind

"They're not ghosts.’

came nearer to the trees. Huck and Tom watched, very
afraid. Then, after a minute, Huck said:

"Tom! They're not ghosts. That's Muff Potter.'

‘So it is. And that's Injun Joe. And the other man is
Doctor Robinson. What are they doing here?’

"They're graverobbers, Tom! They're going to rob a
grave! My father told me about it. The doctor wants a


dead body, you see. He cuts it up because he want.

learn about —'

'Sh!" said Tom. They're getting near.’

Injun Joe and Muff Potter
began to dig.

The three men stoppe
Hoss Williams' grave
Injun Joe and Muff Po
began to dig. Ten mint
later the grave was open

‘Now, doctor,’ said M
Potter. "You want us to t
the body to your hou
That's five dollars more

‘No! said the doctor
gave you the money
morning. I'm not giving |
anymore!’

‘Now you listen to
doctor!" said Injun Joe
want that money! Do
remember a day five ye
ago? I came to your ho
and asked for someth
to eat. And you gave

nothing. Nothing! So give me that money!’
He took the doctor's arm, but suddenly the doctor
him, and Injun Joe fell to the ground.
ts to

In the graveyard

‘Don't hit my friend!" cried Muff Potter. He jumped
on the doctor and the two men began to fight.

It all happened very quickly, and the two boys
watched with open mouths. Injun Joe got up. He had
Muff Potter's knife in his hand now, and he moved
behind the doctor. Then the doctor hit Muff Potter on
the head. Muff fell to the ground, and at the same

Injun Joe moved behind the doctor.


moment the knife in Injun Joe's hand went in
doctor's back. The doctor fell to the ground, on
Muff Potter, and he did not move again.

The two boys could watch no more. Very quietl:
moved away from the trees, and then ran out
graveyard and back to the village.

Injun Joe stood by Hoss Williams' grave and |
down at the two men. Then he put the knife intc
Potter's hand and sat down. Three - four - five m
went by. Potter moved a little and opened his eye

‘What - what happened, Joe?" he asked.

"This is bad, Muff," said Joe. "Why did you kill

Muff looked at the doctor's dead body, then
knife in his hand. ‘Me? Did I kill him?" His face
white, and the knife fell from his hand. 'It's the wh
Joe! I never fight with knives usually. Oh, why did |
all that whiskey tonight? I don't remember anyth

It's OK, Muff, said Joe. I'm not going to tell ar
You get away quickly. Go on - go now!’

Muff Potter got up and ran away. Joe watched h
a minute, then he carefully put the knife next
doctor's body. Then he, too, left the graveyard.

=
The next day the Sheriffs men found the doctor's
in the graveyard - and Muff Potter's knife. That
Muff came to the graveyard to get his knife. B
nto the
top of

ly, they
of the

looked

o Muff
ninutes
es.

1 him?'
| at the
e went
hiskey,
I drink
ning!’

nyone.

him for
to the

's body
t night
But the

And there Muff waited for his trial.

Sheriff's men were there, and they took Muff to
Sr Petersburg's little jail. And there Muff sat for four
weeks, and waited for his trial.

—Le=
Tom and Huck could not forget that night in the
graveyard. They were very unhappy, and very afraid.

‘What're we going to do?" said Tom. Muff Potter
didn't kill the doctor - Injun Joe did. We saw him!'

'T know," Huck said. 'But what can we do? We can't
tell anyone. I'm afraid of Injun Joe. He's dangerous. And
he's a killer. Do you want a knife in your back?’

"Yes, I'm afraid of him, too,’ Tom said. He thought for
a minute. I'm sorry for Muff Potter, but you're right,
Huck. We can't tell anyone about Injun Joe.’
Fa

—LEE =

On Jackson's Island

The summer holidays came, and there was no scl
Tom didn't want to think about Muff Potter and ]
Joe, but it wasn't easy. At night, when he was in be.
saw Injun Joe's face in the dark, and he couldn't s
But he couldn't talk to anyone about it.

One hot summer's day he and Joe Harper were d
by the Mississippi River. They sat and watched
boats, and fished and talked.

‘Let's get away from here!’ said Tom, suddenly. "
go and do something exciting somewhere.’

'OK,' said Joe. 'But what? And where?’

T know," Tom said. 'Let's run away. Let's go anc

They w watched the boats, and nd fished and talked.
hool.
[njun
d, he
leep.

lown
| the

Let's

| live

On Jackson's Island

on Jackson's Island. We can sleep out, under the trees."
Jackson's Island was in the Mississippi, three miles
south of St Petersburg. Nobody lived there.
'Let's ask Huck Finn, too,’ said Tom. 'But don't tell

your mother or father or anyone. Go home and get some

tilings to eat, and meet me here at midnight.’

They cooked some of the meat over the fire.

So that night three boys in a small boat went down the
river to Jackson's Island. They had some bread and some
meat, and Huck had his pipe, too. When they got there,
they carried everything on to the island and made a fire,

under a big old tree. Then they cooked some of the meat
The three boys ran down to the river to swim.

over the fire, and oh, that meat was good - tl
dinner in the world! Soon, they stopped talkin;
eyes closed, and they slept.

The next morning Tom woke up with the sun
head and a smile on his face. Then Huck and jo
up, and the three boys ran down to the river to
After that, they fished, and soon they had about
fish for their breakfast. They cooked the fish on th
and ate them all. They were very hungry.

"That, said Joe happily, 'was a wonderful bre:

After breakfast they walked through the island
some more, talked, fished, and swam again. The
back to their fire in the afternoon. Suddenly
looked up and said, Listen. Can you hear boats"
the best
1g, their

n on his
ye woke
0 swim.
t six big

1eir fire

sakfast!'
1, swam
ey came

y, Torn
7

On Jackson's Island

They listened, and then ran across the island to look
down the river. There were twenty or more boats on the
water. Every boat in St Petersburg was out.

"What are they doing?" asked Joe.

"They're looking for a dead body, I think,' said Huck.
‘They did that last summer when Bill Turner fell in the
river and drowned."

"Who's dead, do you think?" asked Joe.

The boys watched the boats. Suddenly, Tom cried, T
know who's dead! It's us! They're looking for us!’

This was wonderful. Tom looked at his friends.
"We're famous!" he said. ‘Everybody in St Petersburg is
talking about us. And they all feel sorry for us!’

Night came, and the boys went to sleep. But Tom did
not sleep, and when morning came, he wasn't there!

"Huck, where's Tom?’ cried Joe.

'Tdon't know," Huck began, 'but — Look! There he is.
lie's swimming across to the island now. Hey, Tom!

At breakfast Tom told his story. T went home last
night," he said, 'and listened at the window. Joe, your
mother was there, too, and she and Aunt Polly cried and
cried. I heard some very interesting things. On Sunday
there's going to be a big funeral at the church - for us!
And listen - I've got a wonderful idea.’

Huck and Joe listened and laughed, and yes, it was a
wonderful idea.


That night the boys cooked some more fish, and after
dinner Huck got out his pipe and began to smoke.

‘Can we smoke, too ?" asked Tom. 'I want to learn.’

So Huck made pipes for Tom and Joe, and the three
boys sat and smoked.

"Hey, I X\bl smoking,’ said Tom. "It's easy!’

"It's nothing!’ said Joe. 'I'm going to smoke every day.’

But after ten minutes Tom and Joe got quieter and
quieter and their faces went an interesting colour.

Tom and Joe got quieter and quieter.

T'm going for a little walk now," said Tom. He stood
up, carefully, and walked away into the trees.

"Me too,’ said Joe, quickly.

The two boys came back an hour later. But they didn't
smoke their pipes again.

PSS

On Sunday morning there were no happy faces in St
Petersburg. Aunt Polly and Joe's mother and father were
in the church, and all the boys’ friends. The minister said
On Jackson's Island

some very nice things about the three boys, and the boys’
families cried and cried. Everybody cried. And little
Becky Thatcher did not stop crying for one second.
There was a small noise at the back ofthe church, but
at first nobody heard it. Then the minister looked up -
and suddenly stopped speaking. Everybody turned to

look. Their mouths opened, and stayed open.
And into the church came the three dead boys - Tom
first, Joe next, and then Huck.



For a second nobody moved or spoke, and then the
noise began. Aunt Polly and joe's mother ran to the
boys, and took them in their arms. Aunt Polly cried, and
laughed, and cried again.

'Oh, Tom!" she said. "You're a bad boy, but I love
you!'

Suddenly, the minister called out, 'Oh, happy days!
Sing, good people of St Petersburg! Sing and be happy!’

And everybody sang, and smiled, and laughed for a
long time. It was St Petersburg's happiest funeral.

—Le=
The weeks went by, and the judge came to St Petersburg.
On the day before Muff Potter's trial, Huck and Tom
met in the street near Tom's house. Huck was unhappy.

"Tom, you didn't tell anyone about - you know?'

'No, [ didn't. But Huck, what about Muff? People are
saying he's the killer. And he's going to die!’

‘But we can't tell anyone about Injun Joe," said Huck.
T don't want to die, too! Do you?

No, Tom didn't want to die. But he couldn't forget
Muff Potter's face in the jail - old, tired, and unhappy.
And Injun Joe was a free man. It wasn't right.

That night Tom came home late, and very excited. He
could not sleep for two or three hours.

The next morning all the village was at Muff Potter's
trial. Injun Joe was there, too. Muff waited, a tired old
On Jackson's Island

man with a dirty face. The judge began the trial.
Questions, questions, questions. Answers, answers,
answers. And the answers were all bad for Muff Potter.
Yes, I found the knife in the graveyard, next to
Doctor Robinson's body.’
"Yes, that's Muff Potter's knife. He always carries it,’

Yes, I saw Muff Potter in the village that afternoon.
He had the knife with him then.’

Questions, questions, questions ...


Muff Potter began to look more and more unhappy.
Then the judge said: 'Call Thomas Sawyer!"

St Petersburg sat up. What did young Tom Sawyer
know? Everybody looked at him, and waited.

"Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth
of June, at the hour of midnight?’

Tn the graveyard.’

"Why?"

'T went there to see ghosts. With a - a - dead cat.’

St Petersburg laughed, and the judge looked angry.
'And where were you in the graveyard, Thomas?"

‘Behind the trees near Hoss Williams' grave.’

Injun Joe's face suddenly went white.

‘Now, my boy," said the judge. 'Tell us your story.’

And so Tom told his story, and St Petersburg sat and
listened to him with open mouths.

".. . and then Muff Potter fell, and Injun Joe jumped
with the knife and —"'

Crash! Injun joe jumped through the window, and

was out and away in a second.
Es

St Petersburg loved Tom for a week. But Tom was not
happy. Injun Joe was notin jail, and he was a dangerous
man. Tom slept badly for weeks.

The slow summer days went by. Injun Joe did not

come back to St Petersburg, and Tom began to forget.
4
_ Es

[reasure

There is a time in every boy's life when he wants to go
and dig for treasure. And that time came for Tom.

So, one hot summer's day, he went to find Huck.

Huck liked the idea of treasure. "Where are we going
to dig?" he asked.

An old dead tree is best.’

"Who puts the treasure under old trees?

‘Robbers,’ said Tom. 'And then they go away, or they
forget to come back for the treasure.’

"There's a dead tree on Cardiff Hill," said Huck. 'Let's
go there! I've got an old pick and shovel.’

It was three miles to the old tree, and the boys arrived

tired and hot. They dug for an hour or two, but they

wos ff ET Thon Oh

I've got an oldpick and shovel.’
The boys watched through the holes in the floor.

didn't find any treasure. Then they stopped, and Tom
looked down at an old house at the foot of the hill.

"Hey, look!" he said. "Nobody lives in that old house.
Let's go there. Old houses are always good for treasure.’

‘Good for ghosts, too!" said Huck.

They took the pick and shovel with them, went down
the hill, and into the old house. They looked in all the
rooms downstairs, and then went upstairs. But there
was no treasure, and no ghosts. Then they heard a noise.

'Sh!" said Tom, suddenly. "What's that?"

'Ghosts!" whispered Huck.

There were holes in the floor, and through them the
boys could see into the rooms downstairs.

'No," Tom whispered. 'It's two men. One is the old
Treasure

Spaniard. He came to live in the village last week. I don't
know the other man. Sh! Let's listen to them.’

The two men sat down on the floor. The Spaniard had
a green hat and long white hair; the other man was small
and dark. He took out a bag and began to open it.

It's hot in here," the Spaniard said. He took off his
green hat - and then he took off his long white hair!

"Tom!" Huck whispered upstairs. 'That's Injun Joe!

‘We took six hundred and fifty dollars when we
robbed that house,’ said the second man. He took some
money out of the bag. "We can take fifty dollars with us
now. What are we going to do with the six hundred?’

‘Leave it here,’ said Injun Joe. "We can come back and
get it next week. Here, give me the bag.’

He walked across the room to the fireplace, moved two

big stones from the floor, and began to dig with his knife.

He began to dig with his knife.


Upstairs, the two boys watched excitedly. Treasure!
Six hundred dollars of wonderful treasure!

Injun Joe stopped digging. 'Hello, what's this?" he
said. "There's something here. It's an old box.’

The two men got the box out and opened it.

It's money!" said Injun Joe's friend.

Injun Joe put his hand into the box. 'There are
thousands of dollars here!" he said, and the two men
looked at the money with happy smiles.

‘But who—' began Injun Joe's friend.

‘Don’t ask,’ Injun Joe said. 'It's our money now.’

'We can't take it with us today,’ said his friend. "What
can we do with it? Put it back under the floor?’

"Yes," said Injun Joe. (Happy faces upstairs.) 'No!
(Very unhappy faces upstairs.) Let's put it under the
cross - nobody goes there. We can take it there tonight.’

When night came, the two men carried all the money
away. The boys did not go after them because they were
afraid of Injun Joe. But they wanted very much to find
that'cross'.

—EE=
For a week the two boys thought and thought about the
treasure. It was 'under the cross’, but where was the
cross? In St Petersburg the boys watched the 'Spaniard'
carefully, but they didn't see a cross, and they didn't find

the treasure.
5)

ro
—&&=

In the cave

The next Saturday was Becky Thatcher's birthday, and
all Becky's friends were very excited.

Tt's going to be a wonderful day,” Becky told Tom.
"We're going to have a picnic by the river, and after that,
we can visit McDougal's Cave.

So in the morning, a big boat took Becky, Tom, and
all their friends down the river. There were some older
children on the boat too, but all the mothers and fathers
stayed at home. Picnics are better without them!

And it was a very happy, noisy picnic.

It was a very happy, noisy picnic.


For hours the children walked and ran through the cave.

After the picnic, the children took out their candles,
and ran up the hil! to the cave. The mouth of the cave
was dark, and some of the children were afraid at first.
But caves are exciting, so in the end everybody went in.

McDougal's Cave was very, very big, with hundreds
of tunnels and rooms. The tunnels went up, down, and
into the hill for .miles. You could walk for days in
McDougal's Cave. Nobody knew all the cave, but many
people knew the tunnels near the door. You could play

all day in these tunnels. Torn, of course, knew them well.
In the cave

For hours the children

walked and ran through the cave, up
and down the tunnels, in and out of the rooms.

In the evening they came out, and walked down the hill
to the boat, tired but happy.

When the boat arrived back in St Petersburg, it was
dark. Huck Finn saw the boat, but he did not know
about the picnic. He did not go to birthday picnics, of
course, because the mothers of St Petersburg did not
like him. But tonight Huck was only interested in
treasure - Injun Joe's treasure. Injun Joe was in an old
building by the river, and Huck waited in the street near
the building.

‘Perhaps,’ he thought, 'Injun Joe'scross is in there.
And the box of money. I must wait and watch. I can tell
Tom about it tomorrow."

But Injun Joe didn't come out. At midnight it began to
tain, and Huck waited all night in the cold street. In the


morning he could not move and he could not speak. He
felt cold, then hot, then cold, then hot again. Mrs
Douglas, a woman from the church, found him in the
street. She took him to her home and put him to bed. And
there he stayed for two weeks. He was very ill, and so he
did not hear about Tom and Becky.

But on Sunday morning all St Petersburg knew about
Tom and Becky - because they were not on the boat
when it came back to the village. Where were they? Were
they lost in the cave? And were they alive, or dead?

At first Tom and Becky played with their friends in the
cave. Then Tom wanted to go down a new tunnel, and
Becky went with him.

They walked and talked, and went into a second
tunnel, then a third. Sometimes Tom put a mark with

Sometimes Tom put a mark on the tunnel wall.
They ran into the nearest tunnel, with the bats behind them.

candle smoke on the tunnel wall - he wanted to find the
mouth of the cave again! Then they came out of the
tunnels into a big room. There were hundreds of bats in
this room,-and the candles woke them up. Tom took
Becky's hand and they ran into the nearest tunnel, with
the bats behind them. But one bat hit Becky's candle and
it went out. The children ran and ran through the
tunnels, and at last they got away from the bats. They
stopped and sat down. Suddenly, it was very, very quiet,

‘Where are we now, Tom?' Becky whispered, afraid.

‘Tdon'tknow,' said Tom. 'I think it's time to go back.
But we can't go through that big room because of the
bats. Let's so down this tunnel.’


They went down one tunnel, then a second, a third, a
fourth . . . Then they wanted to find the big room with
the bats again, but they couldn't. Becky began to cry:

"Tom, we can't get out. We're lost, Tom, we're lost!’

They walked, and walked. When they were tired, they
sat down; Then they got up and walked again. Time
went by. Was it day, or night? They didn't know.

Then Tom wanted to find water. They had nothing to
eat, and they must have something to drink. They found
a very small river and sat down next to it.

‘Becky, said Tom. "We must stay here. Near this river.
This is our last candle, and ...'

He did not finish, but Becky understood.

"Tom?

"Yes, Becky.

'Are they going to come and look for us?’

'Of course! When the boat gets to St Petersburg —'

‘But how can they find us, in these hundreds of
tunnels? Oh, Tom, Tom, we're going to die in here!’

Becky began to cry again. Then the candle went out
and the two children were in the dark. They sat for hours
and hours. They slept a little, then woke up, then slept
again. Was it Sunday now? Or Monday?

Suddenly Tom sat up. Listen! Somebody's calling!’

The two children listened. They heard it again, a little
nearer. They called back; then they began to walk down
In the cave

the tunnel in the dark, with their hands on the wall. They
stopped and listened again, but now they couldn't hear
anything. Slowly, they went back to their river.

They slept again, and woke up very, very hungry.

"Perhaps it's Tuesday now," Tom thought. "What can
I do? I must do something? Then he had an idea.

‘Becky, listen. I've got a long string in my pocket. I can
go down some of the small tunnels and get back to you
with the string. You wait here.’

Slowly and carefully, Tom went down the first tunnel
on his hands and knees. Then the tunnel wall on his right
finished, and there was nothing. Tom put out his hand
to feel the floor. And just then, away to his right, he saw
a hand - a hand with a candle.

Tom went down the first tunnel on bis hands and knees.


At once Tom called out. 'Help!' he cried.

The hand moved, and Tom saw an arm and a face. It
was Injun Joe! Tom was very afraid, but Injun Joe was
afraid too, and he quickly ran away down the tunnel.

Tom went back to Becky, but he did not tell her about
Injun Joe. Tom waited for an hour, then went into a

different tunnel with his string. Then a third tunnel...

It was Tuesday evening, and St Petersburg waited. Many
of the villagers were in the cave, and they looked for the
children day and night. But they heard nothing, saw
nothing, and found nothing.

Then, late that evening, there was a sudden noise in
the streets. People began to run to the Thatchers' house.

"They're here! Becky and Tom are here!’

Most of the village came to listen to Tom's story.

'Tt was in the sixth tunnel,’ he told them. T went to the
end of my string, and suddenly, I could see daylight!
There was a little hole in the cave wall. I put my head out,
and there was the river, right under my nose! I went back
and got Becky, and we climbed out through the hole.
Then we stopped a boat on the river. We were five miles

from the mouth of the cave!

Tom was very tired after his three days in the cave, and
he went to bed and stayed there for two days. He heard
5: ARG Me

‘Suddenly, I could see daylight!’ said Tom.

about Huck and went to see him on Sunday, and then
every day. But Mrs Douglas was always in the room.

"You can just say hello," she told Tom. 'And then you
must go. Huck is very ill, and he needs to sleep.’

So Tom could not talk about anything exciting, and
he could not tell Huck about Injun Joe.

One day, about two weeks after the picnic, Tom was
in Becky's house, and her father came in.

"Well, Tom," Mr Thatcher said. "Would you like to go
back to the cave again, one day?’

Tm not afraid of that cave,’ said Tom.

Mr Thatcher laughed. 'There are a lot of people like
you, Tom. But nobody's going into the cave again. There


are big doors across the cave mouth now - and nobody
can open them!

Tom's face went white. ‘But Mr Thatcher - Injun Joe's
in that cave!’

An hour later, fifty men were at the cave and they
opened the doors. InjunJoe was on the ground, dead, his
face to the door and his knife in his hand.

Injun Joe was on the ground, dead.
6
—E&s

Under the cross

The day after Injun Joe's funeral, Huck was out of bed.
He and Tom walked slowly out of the village. They had
a good, long talk, and Huck heard all about the picnic,
the cave, and Injun Joe.

"We're never going tc find the money now,’ said Huck.

"Huck," said Tom. 'The money isn't in St Petersburg.
It's in the cave - I know it is! Why was Injun Joe in the
cave? Because he took the box of money there! Right?’

Huck looked excited. 'Say that again, Tom!

"The money's in the cave! And we can get to it easily.
Let's go there now! I've got some candles and a long
string. We can take a boat and put it back later.’

Twenty minutes later the boys were in a boat on the
Mississippi. They went eight miles down the river, and
then Tom stopped by some small trees.

'Here we are!’ he said.

Tom's hole was just behind the trees. Tom took a
candle and climbed in. Huck climbed in after him.

'Injun Joe never found this hole,’ said Tom. 'Or he did
find it and couldn't get through it. It's very small.’

The boys went carefully through the tunnels with
their string. Then Tom stopped.
ap

The boys went eight miles down the river.

'Tsaw Injun Joe about here," he said. 'And look, Huck
- there's the cross!’

There was a big smoke cross on the tunnel wall. The
boys looked up and down the tunnel, but there was no
box of money.

‘Injun joe said under the cross,’ said Tom. 'Perhaps
it's under the ground. Look, we can move these stones.’

The boys took their knives and began to dig by the
tunnel wall. Very soon, they found a second, smaller
tunnel under the wall. They climbed down into it, and
came into a small room. There was a bed, two whiskey
bottles, some old shoes - and the box of money,

—e=
When somebody finds treasure, everybody hears about
it very quickly. The two boys carried the box through the

Under the cross

village. And when they got to Aunt Polly's house, half
the village was with them. Everybody went into the
house.

'Oh, Tom, Tom!" cried Aunt Polly. "What is it now?
And what have you got there?’

Tom put the box on the table and opened it.

There were twelve thousand dollars in that box. And
suddenly, Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn were the
richest people in St Petersburg.

There were twelve thousand dollars in that box.
