

1H]; c!HARAc!1!;RS . 
Oliver 1-wist 
Oliver is an orphan. Is he strong enough to resist Fagin s attempts to make 
I
him a thief? 
I 
-1he Artf\l.1 Dodger I I 
Dodger is Fagin,s favourite and very good at his job. -1­Can Oliver trust this new friend? 
Fa.gih 
Fagin looks after orphaned boys, as long as they earn him money. Can he make himself rich -by turning Oliver into a thief? 


OLIV!;R 'l'WIS't 
Oliver Twist didn't know who had named him. It wasrit his father, who had never seen him, and it certainly wasn't his mother, who died giving birth to him. It was probably someone in the cold, grey workhouse in which he lived with hundreds of other orphaned boys. 
Life in the workhouse was cruel and hard, but the worst thing ofall was the lack offood. At meal times, in the cavernous grey stone hall, the boys queued before the fat Master for their one ladleful ofgrey, watery gruel_. Having returned to their hard ·benches, they would devour their gruel in seconds, licking their bowls and spoons so clean that washing up was never necessary. Still their stomachs rumbled. 
They were terribly thin and always hungry. Not just peckish, really hungry. When they felt that they could bear it no longer, the orphans decided to take action. One ofthem 1inust be 
7 

'Please, sir. I want some more.' Silence. The Master turned grey and whispered 
'More?' Then he turned from pale grey to crimson. 'MORE?' he bellowed, grabbing Oliver 
. roughly. 'Mr Bumble, come quickly. This boy has asked for MORE!' 
brave enough to ask for more. The boy they chose was Oliver Twist. 
The evening arrived. As the boys finished licking their spoons, the room became quiet but for the soft sound oftwo timid, terrified feet tapping to the front. Oliver looked up at the Master and held out his bowl. 
8 
Fighting back tears, Oliver replied 'No. I have been walking for seven days. I am very tired and hungry.' 
The voice introduced itself. 'Dodger. The Artful Dodger's me name.' 
Oliver looked up through the blur ofhis tearful eyes to see a strange sight. The Artful Dodger was about ten years old, small and filthy, with sharp little eyes and a snub nose. He was dressed in a grown maris clothes. A hat struggled to balance right on top of his head. 
Mr Bumble dragged Oliver in front ofthe owners ofthe orphanage. They decided that he was a dangerous influence, and they must get rid ofhim immediately. 
So, Oliver.was thrown from the only home he remembered and sent to work for a cruel family. The adults worked him hard and beat him, and·the children bullied him. Unable to stand it any longer, Oliver ran away. 

Oliver could think of only one place to go: London. For seven long and lonely days he trudged along the muddy road. He slept in ditches and had to beg for food. Weak with hunger and misery, and shivering with cold, Oliver eventually reached London, where he sank to the ground_. What should he do now? He was completely without friends. Completely without hope. 
•'Got lodgings? Any food? Any money?' Oliver heard a voice ask. 
10 
!./··i~,:}~~ 
~fi"'_:51\ ~ 
,t~:i? 
He half-smiled at Oliver, his hat wobbling. 
'Come with me, me old pal,' said the Artful Dodger, holding out his hand and pulling Oliver back onto his blistered feet. 
It was very dark when they arrived at their destination. The street was narrow and muddy, and the thick-smelling air was dreadful. Its stench filled Oliver's mouth and nose. Voices ofmen shouting, children screaming and babies crying filled his ears. Fear filled his thoughts. The Artful Dodger led Oliver up a dark, broken stairway. Oliver held his breath, partly through fear and partly because of the smell. 
'Whds this then?' 
A shrivelled old face, mean-looking and ugly, peered through the darlmess. A cold, bony hand reached out and touched Oliver's face, making him shiver. 
17. 
The boys all laughed too as they crowded around Oliver, searching his pockets for food or money. 
Although Oliver suspected that he couldn't trust his new friends, he had no choice. He ate the little food they offered and fell into an exhausted sleep. 

Fagin kept Oliver locked in the room for so many days that he became used to the stench and the darkness. He noticed that the boys went out early every morning. They would return 'late in the evening to give things to Fagin, who then hid the items in a locked chest, cackling and rubbing his hands in delight. 'Good work, me boys, good work.' The boys played games in which they tried to take things from Fagiris pockets without him noticing. One day, Oliver joined in the game. He soon became good at it. 
'A new pal,' answered The Dodger. 
As Oliver's eyes grew used to the candlelight, he saw that the ghastly hand and face belonged to a stooped man with long, matted red hair, a sharp nose and mean, thin lips. Around the room were several rough beds made of old sacks. Four boys, as thin and filthy as the man, were sitting around a table. 
'Fagin -this is Oliver Twist,' said The Dodger. 
'Glad to see you, young Oliver,' sneered Fagin. 'You'll like it 'ere, won't 'e boys! Ha ha ha.' His laugh sent cold shivers down Oliver's spine. 
'Hush!' he whispered sharply. 'There's our prey.' 
Oliver looked and saw a respectable­looking elderly gentleman, smartly dressed in a bottle-green coat, with a bald head and gold-rimmed glasses. He was engrossed in a book at a bookstall, completely unaware of his surroundings, completely unaware ofThe Artful Dodger who slid up behind him, sly as a fox, and slowly slipped a silk handkerchief from the man's pocket. 


'You're making good progress, young Oliver,' praised Fagin. 'It's time for The Dodger to show you how to earn your keep. Watch him closely and learn well.' 
Oliver was delighted at the idea ofbeing outside again. The next day he cheerfully followed The Artful Dodger into the street, wondering where they were going. Suddenly, The Dodger pushed him into an alley. 
The gentleman noticed that his pocket was empty. 
'Stop thief1' he shouted as The Dodger sped away. Confused and frightened, Oliver ran too. 
'Stop thiefl' more people shouted as they joined in the chase. Everyone was running pell-mell, helter-skelter, slap-dash, tearing through the streets, yelling, swearing. Oliver ran faster, terrified. 
'Stop thief!' cried a hundred angry voices. 
Oliver was running, panting, stumbling, falling. 
Caught. 
'You young devil,' roared a red-faced giant of a man, roughly pulling Oliver up by his 
collar. The blood-thirsty crowd gathered 
noisily around them like a pack 
of hungry wolves around 
a recent kill. 
With horror and alarm, Oliver's eyes widened. Time stood still. Oliver held his breath. 


'Wait. Don't hurt him,' cried a lone voice from the back ofthe pack, just in time. 
It was the elderly gentleman. He had finally caught up and could see the terror in the young boy's eyes. 
They didrit hurt Oliver, not much anyway. The police arrested him and a few days later Oliver, pale, weak and frightened, found himselfin court. Nobody believed that Oliver was innocent except the gentleman who had been robbed, Mr.Brownlow. He felt pity for Oliver. He thought he could see something special in Oliver's face. Perhaps he saw his goodness. Perhaps Oliver reminded him of someone he had once loved. 
'Poor boy, poor boy,' sighed Mr Brownlow in court. 'I fear that he is ill.' When the court failed to prove that Oliver had stolen the handkerchief, Oliver fainted. Mr Brownlow took him home with him to let him recover. 


Bill Sikes finished his beer. The three put their heads together and made their plan. 
Back in his dark, dreary, dismal den, Fagin sat at a dirty table, wringing his hands in worry. With him sat a heavily-built brute ofa man, Bill Sikes. 
'Oliver has been gone for some weeks now,' complained Fagin. 'I'm afraid he may say something that will get us into trouble.' 
'Curse the boy,' muttered his companion angrily. After taking a noisy swig ofhis beer, he looked up with dark, scowling eyes, one ofwhich had been blackened in a ·fight. I-{e looked dirty and unshaven. 'Curse him!' he thundered, thumping his fist on the table, spilling his beer. 'We must find him.' 
Turning to the young lady who stood behind him, he commanded, 'Nancy. You must get the ~oy back.' 
Nancy, who would have been pretty if she had not been so dirty, hungry and tired, looked tenderly at Bill. With a cunning laugh she answered, 'I think I can, Bill dear. I think I can.' 

Oliver benefited greatly from the first love and care he remembered receivjng in the nine short years ofhis life. He grew stronger and happier than ever before. He was eager to please Mr Brownlow, who grew to love and trust him in spite ofknowing nothing about him. 
After some weeks, Mr Brownlow decided to send Oliver on his first errand. Imagine Oliver's pleasure in this proof of Mr Brownlow's trust. Imagine his determination to do the errand well, as he set out in his smart new clothes, carrying books to return to the library and some money to pay a bill. Imagine how proudly Oliver walked. 
Now imagine Oliver's confusion when Nancy approached him through the crowd, shouting 'My Brother! Oliver! My dear, sweet, 
•innocent brother!' And imagine his fear and horror when Bill Sikes grabbed him roughly from behind. • ­


'You're coming back to Fagin's with us,' hissed Bill in his ear, holding his arms so tightly that Oliver feared they would break. 'Damn youboy!' cursed Bill, pushing the struggling Oliver through the streets. 
Imagine not only Oliver's fear, but also his desperate sadness that he had let Mr Brownlow down. 
As the familiar smells of Fagin' s room surrounded him, he begged 'Oh please send the books back. Send him back his books and money.' 
Bill Sikes spat, laughed, and bolted.the door with a bang. 'Be gentle with him, Bill,' Oliver heard Nancy say. 
Fagin kept Oliver locked up alone for many days. Oliver wept bitterly to think of Mr Brownlow' s disappointment when he realised that Oliver could not be trusted. He wept for the loss of sunlight and for the loss ofhis one chance ofa better life. 
'2.6 

through the window,' said Sikes, his dark eyes fixed, on Oliver. 
The men were planning a burglary, and Oliver was to play a part. He trembled with fear. 'Please dont make me steal,' he pleaded. They ignored him. 
'P-p-p-please dont make me steal,' begged the terrified Oliver again two nights later, on a dark, cold night when Sikes pointed towards a large well-lit house. 
'Quiet, vermin,' whispered Sikes. 'You know your job. Now do it.' 

'Stop that noise or I'll kill you,' roared Sikes 
through the door. 'Not unless you kill me first,' argued Nancy bravely. Oliver realised that he had one friend in this terrible place. Unfortunately, when Fagin beat Oliver his friend was unable to help. 

Weeks later, Fagin, Sikes and The Dodger sat huddled 
' 
around Fagin'.s table, their heads close together, whispering. Oliver was there too, listening in horror. 'He's the only one small enough to go 


As though dreaming, Oliver crept alone through the dark garden towards the house. Suddenly he heard shouts and voices which seemed to come from everywhere and nowhere. The dream became a nightmare as Oliver heard shots being fir~d, and he felt a searing pain as a bullet hit him. A cold, deadly feeling crept over his body and he staggered forward, stumbling and tumbling into a ditch. The nightmare ended with the sound ofmen running away. Then darkness and silence. 

Meanwhile, Mr Brownlow had been searching desperately for Oliver. He could not believe that Oliver had betrayed him deliberately, and felt that he must be in trouble. His search led him in urtexpected directions as he gradually learned more about Oliver's mysterious past. He was astonished to discover that Oliver was the son of a very dear and very wealthy friend 


Oliver spent a long and happy time with Mrs Maylie and her niece, growing stronger every day. They cared for him as though he were their own family. Every day, Oliver brought colourful flowers from the hedgerows to decorate the kitchen table. The sweet scent ofthe flowers always filled the air, competing for attention with the cheerful chirping ofthe birds as they sang joyfully about a life led in simplicity and goodness. 
There was only one cloud in Oliver's blue sky. Somewhere, he feared, Mr Brownlow still felt betrayed, still thought that the kindness he had shown to Oliver had been a great mistake. 

Autumn approached; and the first fingers of frost started to sprinkle a whiteness over the morning fields. Flowers became more difficult to find, the birds grew quieter, and Oliver came in from the fields a little earlier every day. 
JJ 

ofhis,now dead. Now he knew why Oliver's face had so caught his notice. 
Unfortunately, Mr Brownlows searchdid not bring him anywhere near to the ditch in which Oliver lay bleeding. His search did not take him to the house where Oliver was carried by a kindly farm worker. Mr Brownlow was a long way away as Oliver began to make a slow but steady recovery, nursed and cared for by a generous Mrs Maylie. 



Back in London, Fagin and Sikes paced around their cold, dark room. Sikes looked puzzled; Fagin wore an evil grin. 
'No Bill, I cannot tell you how I acquired this information. What I can tell you is that 
35 


At night, Oliver lay in bed, thinking and reading by candlelight before he blew out the candle and fell contentedly asleep. 
What was that? Oliver sat bolt upright in his bed. He listened. A slight rustle. His heart thumped. He stared at the window. He felt his blood turn cold as he saw the 
eerie glow ofa lantern outside the window. In that glow he saw a face which reminded him of dark, dirty rooms, ofgrey skies and noisy streets; a face with a sharp nose and mean lips, framed with matted red hair. In less than a second the lantern and the face disappeared, but Oliver was frozen to the spot, wide­eyed and rigid with terror. 
Fagin had found him. 

Nancy, sitting in the shadows in the corner the room, pretended to sleep. If ariyone had !n watching her, they would have seen her n turn pale, her hartds start to tremble, and 
•breath come in short gasps as she realised t a new danger faced her young friend Oliver. 
little Oliver is worth money to us now, Bill, he is our little pot of gold.' Fagin rubbed his hands together before continuing, 'His father was a wealthy man; We need to catch Oliver quickly. We need to turn him into one ofus: into a liar and a thief. Then his money will be ours.' Fagin's eyes glistened with greed. 
of1 beE ski her tha ofthe building and walked in a direction that was new to her, through unfamiliar streets. She walked away from the city's squalor towards the freshness ofthe fields. Hours later, exhausted, she knocked at Mrs Maylie' s door. 


Nancy had led a bad life, stealing, hurting and lying, but deep down inside she had a good heart. She had only acted badly because she was so poor, and had so little hope in a cruel world. Now she wanted to do some acts of goodness. She wanted to help Oliver. 
That night, when Sikes was sound asleep and snoring loudly, Nancy crept nervously out 


stopped. The police can stop them. Do not return to your old ways. You have shown that you are good at heart. We will help to end your poverty, to change your life into one ofgoodness.' 
Nancy looked sad but determined. 'I have lived with these people all my life. Bad though they may be, I will not betray them. Bad though I may be, I am loyal. I cannot, will not, leave Bill now. He needs me. Your offer is a kind one, but I will not leave Bill. No. You must take Oliver away to safety. I must return to my life.' 
'How will we learn more oftheir plot?' asked Mrs Maylie. 
'Every Sunday night, from eleven until the clock strikes twelve, I will walk on London Bridge. You can find me there,' promised Nancy, 'if I am alive.' Her words left a sense of dread in the air as she turned and set offback towards London. 

4-1 


Nancy's story was long and sad. Mrs Maylie and her niece gasped in horror as she told them how she and Sikes had kidnapped Oliver. But this was nothing compared with the horror they felt when she told them that Fagin and Sikes planned to kidnap Oliver again. 
'You must tell us where these men can be found,' urged Mrs Maylie. 'They must be 
4-0 

An hour later, Oliver sat, waiting, in a warm and cosy room. He could hear the mumbling voices ofthe people most dear to him in the whole world. Mr Brownlow and Mrs Maylie were in the next room, filling in each other's gaps in Oliver's story. They both had a great deal to tell. Mrs Maylie reassured Mr Brownlow that Oliver had never betrayed him. 
'He is a child of a noble nature and a warm heart,' she assured him. 
Mrs Maylie and her niece were determined to keep Oliver safe at any cost. One morning the three ofthem were on a visit to London. Suddenly Oliver turned white, as though he had seen a ghost. A bald-headed gentleman in a bottle-green coat and gold-rimmed glasses was standing reading at a bookstall. Oliver gripped Mrs Maylie's arm. 'It's him,' he whispered. 
'It's Mr Brownlow.' 
the embraces, when Oliver was brought into the room. Nor do we need to listen to the assurances oflove and the joyful laughter which filled Mr Brownlow's house. We shall, however, note the contrast between this and the dreadful, bitter, hate-filled atmosphere in Fagiri s room as he began to suspect Nancy's betrayal. Fagin arranged for one ofhis boys to follow her wherever she went. 

'It is as I thought,' smiled Mr Brownlow with relief He then told her all that he had discovered about Oliver's family. He explained that afterOliver's mother died, his father had married a cruel, heartless woman, with whom he had a son called M6nks. Monks and his mother had learned that Oliver was to inherit his 
i •
dead father's fortuneJ However,' continued Mr Brownlow, 'this fortune can only be his ifhe has lived without any stain upon his character. Ifhe has ever stolen, his wealth shall pass to Mo~s.' 
Mrs Maylie now understood why Fagin was determined to turn Oliver into a thief, as Nancy had told her. Fagin must know Monks. There was no other explanation. Mrs Maylie shared her suspicions with Mr Brownlow, and told him of Fagin' s wicked plot. They agreed that they must go to'meet Nancy on London Bridge on Sunday night. 



\ 
Cries of 'Murder!' soon filled the London streets, echoing between the cramped buildings, competing with the howling ofdogs and the screaming ofbabies. Trapped by the angry crowds, Bill headed towards the open window. As the thuds offeet thundered up the rotting stairs, he prepared a rope for his In the cold, damp darkness below London Bridge, just before the clock struck twelve on Sunday night, Nancy looked at the deadly water ofthe River Thames and shivered. She frequently glanced nervously over her shoulder as, in whispers, she told Mr Brownlow and Mrs Maylie more details of Fagin's plan to capture Oliver again. 

Deep in the shadows, pressed close against the wet wall, a dark figure listened carefully. As the conversation ended, p.e slid quietly away, rupning swiftly through the streets ahead ofNancy to tell Fagin and Bill Sikes ofher betrayal. When Nancy arrived home, Bill Sikes, the man she loved, was waiting for her. A gun was in his hand. 
The end ofNancy's short, sad life was brutal. Sikes showed no mercy to the girl who had turned down the chance of a better life just to stay with him. Even Bill Sikes, hardened by poverty and crime, could not look at her crumpled, bleeding body when he had finished. 


escape. He rushed and cursed. He hurried and fumbled. He made a dreadful mistake. The rope failed him as he stumbled through the window. Still cursing, Bill Sikes fell to his death as the crowd burst through the door. 

Oliver, Mr Brownlow and Mrs Maylie did not 
rejoice over these deaths, which marked the 
end oftwo hard, unhappy lives. They did, 
however, rejoice .over Oliver's new-found, 
freedom. Oliver joined Mrs Maylie and her 
niece in their countryside home, where they 
shar.ed great happiness. They were soon 
followed by Mr Brownlow, who wanted to stay . close to his new friends and was quite tired of 
living i~ the dirt and noise ofthe city. 
Oliver had resisted all attempts to destroy 
his goodness, and so was able to inherit his 
~ather's money. Out of kindness and pity, he 
allowed his half-brother Monks enough money 
to live comfortably. 

Oliver mourned for his friend Nancy who, unlike him, had not taken the opportunity of a better life when it was offered to her. 
This leaves us with only two more tales to finish. The Artful Dodger and Fagin were both arrested for their numerous crimes. Oliver and Mr Brownlow had the unpleasant task ofvisiting Fagin in prison in order to get from him some stolen documents relating to Oliver's fortune. 
Bitter and mean to the very end, Fagin sat in his dark prison cell, his face so distorted and pale, his eyes so bloodshot, that he already looked more dead than alive as he awaited his punishment. 
53 


