Marley was dead. He had been dead for
seven years now. Did Scrooge know this?
Of course he did. Ebenezer Scrooge was
Marley's business partner and he was his
only friend. He was, after all, the only one,
apart from the undertaker, who went to
Marley's funeral.

What kind of a man was Scrooge, then?
Well, if you could think of the coldest
weather or the iciest wind, you might be
able to imagine the man. The weather
itself had no effect on him. Rather, it was
the cold inside that froze everything about
him: his lips, his nose, his cheeks, his eyes,
his voice, especially his voice, and even
his walk. And nobody was meaner than
Scrooge. Nobody ever stopped him in the
street to say, ‘My dear Scrooge, how are
you? When will you come to see me?’

Once upon a time - on Christmas Eve - old
Scrooge sat busy in his office. It was cold,
nasty weather, and the fog was thick. The city
clocks had just rang three, but it was quite
dark already - it had not been light all day
- and candles were burning in the windows.
The door of Scrooge’s office was open so
that he might keep an eye on his clerk, who
was busy copying letters by a small flame
(this was because Scrooge was so mean that
he kept the coal in his own room).

'A Merry Christmas, uncle!’ cried a cheerful
voice. It was the voice of Scrooge’s nephew,
a warm and handsome man who had come to
invite his uncle to a Christmas party.

‘Bah!’ said Scrooge, ‘humbug!’

‘Christmas a humbug, uncle!” said
Scrooge’s nephew. "You don’t mean that,
[am sure?’

'I do,” said Scrooge. ‘Merry Christmas?
You are too poor to be merry!’

‘And you are too rich not to be!’ said his
nephew.

"What is Christmas,” said Scrooge,
‘but a time for paying bills and a time for
finding yourself a year older? [ do not need
Christmas and Christmas does not need
me. Keep Christmas in your own way, and
let me keep it in mine.’
1 2=
‘Keep it?" repeated Scrooge’s nephew.
‘But you don't keep it!’

‘Let me leave it alone, then,” said Scrooge.
"Why be so happy. Christmas hasn't ever
made you any money!’

"There are many things in this world that
are good but not money-making,” replied
the nephew. ‘And Christmas is one of them.
It is a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant
time; the only time in the year when men
and women open their closed hearts and
think of others. And so, uncle, though
Christmas has never made me any money,
I believe that it has done me good, and will
do me good; and [ say, God bless it!’

An applause was heard in the next room.
‘Let me hear another sound from you,’
barked Scrooge to his clerk, ‘and you'll keep
your Christmas by losing your position!’

‘Don’t be angry, uncle. Come! Have
dinner with us tomorrow.’

‘Don’t be so foolish!’ said Scrooge.

"Why can you not be happy for once and
joinus?’, asked Scrooge’s nephew.
‘Good afternoon!’ said Scrooge.

‘I am sorry, with all my heart, to see you
so cold-hearted. But | have made the effort
because I believe it is worth it and I'll keep
my Christmas spirit to the end. So a Merry
Christmas, uncle!’

‘Good afternoon!’ said Scrooge.

‘And a Happy New Year!’

‘Good afternoon!’ repeated Scrooge.

As soon as Scrooge’s nephew left the
office, two gentlemen, holding books and
papers, walked in.

‘Scrooge and Marley's, | believe,” said
one of them, looking at his list. ‘Do [ have
the pleasure of speaking with Mr. Scrooge,
or Mr. Marley?’

‘Mr. Marley died seven years ago, this
very night,” Scrooge replied.

‘lam truly sorry to hear that, Mr. Scrooge.’
said the other man.

‘I am not,” said Scrooge. ‘He left me with
a load of paperwork!’

"We are here because we believe that
Christmas is a time of giving, and who
might need this more than the poor and
homeless?’ said the first.

‘Are there no prisons?” asked Scrooge.

‘Many prisons,” said the other.

I'm very glad to hear it,” said Scrooge.

‘But we feel that the poor and homeless
should also share in our joy and happiness,
and prisons can hardly do that. Because
of this, we are raising money for them
and would very much like people to help.
Perhaps you too would like to help?’

‘Gentlemen, replied Scrooge. ‘I do not
help people who cannot help themselves!
If the poor are poor, it is for a reason. Now
good afternoon Gentlemen, and please
close the door on your way out’.

Having little hope that Scrooge would
change his mind, the gentlemen left. The
fog, meanwhile, had thickened. Night
had fallen on the world outside. The cold
outside became so intense that people
started lighting fires in the streets. The
brightness of the shops, whose windows
were decorated with holly, made cold

10
11
faces reddish as they passed. The carol
singers were out, their voices heard full of
happiness. One of these stopped outside
Scrooge’s office, but at the sound of:

‘God bless you, merry gentleman!’

‘I've had enough!’

Scrooge slapped his ruler with such noise
(bang) that the young voice left screaming.
At last, closing-up time came in the office.
A smile came across the clerk's face as he
blew his candle out and put his hat on.

You'll want all day tomorrow, | suppose?’
said Scrooge.

‘It's Christmas sir, and it only comes once
a year, said the clerk.

‘A poor excuse. You'd better be here even
earlier the next morning!” said Scrooge.
The clerk promised that he would; and
Scrooge walked out complaining. After
locking up the office, the clerk made his
way home to Camden Town, dancing
merrily on the snow as he thought about
spending Christmas with his family.

12
Chapter II

‘Remember my words’

13
Scrooge had his sad dinner in his usual
sad tavern. Once he had finished it and
read all the papers, he made his way home.
Scrooge lived in the same house which had
once belonged to Marley: it was a nasty old
place where no normal person would like
to live.

Now, you must believe that there was
nothing very special about the knocker
that hung on the door, except that it was
very large. You must also believe that
Scrooge had seen it, night and day, when
he came back from work and when he went
to work. As soon as Scrooge put his key in
the door, the knocker seemed to change
before his very eyes - not a knocker, but
Marley's face!

Marley's face. It was not an angry face, but
looked at Scrooge as Marley used to: with
ghostly glasses on its ghostly forehead.
The hair was strangely wavy, the eyes
wide open, and the colour bluish. It was
horrible! But, as Scrooge fearfully stared at
it, the face changed back into the knocker

14
15

again. Scrooge quickly turned the key,
walked in, and shut the door with a bang.
As he lit his candle, Scrooge turned to see
if the screws that held the knocker were
in the right place. They were. He walked
hurriedly across the hall, up the stairs to his
rooms, and double-locked his own door.

Sitting room, bedroom. All as it should
be. Nobody under the table, nobody under
the sofa; a small fire in the fireplace; spoon
and basin ready; and the little saucepan of
porridge on the cooker. Nobody under
the bed; nobody in the closet; nobody in
his dressing-gown, which was hanging on
the wall.

Quite satisfied, Scrooge took off his tie;
put on his dressing-gown and slippers, and
his night-cap; and sat down in front of the
fire to eat his porridge.

He couldn't stop thinking of old Marley.
"Humbug! said Scrooge, as he finished.

After carefully looking around the room
with his short eyes, he noticed an old
disused bell that hung in the room. With

16
rising fear, he saw the bell begin to swing.
Left ... right; left ... right. It swung so
softly that it hardly made a sound; but
soon it rang out loudly, and so did every
bell in the house. And although this might
have lasted half a minute, or a minute, it
seemed like an hour. The bells stopped
as soon as they had begun, together.
And from down deep in the house came
a mettalic noise, as if some person were
pulling a heavy chain.

Somewhere in the house a door flew
open with a bang. The noise grew louder,
and louder, and louder still, on the floors
below. It slowly came up the stairs, and was
coming straight towards his door.

‘It's humbug still!” said Scrooge. ‘I won't
believe it.’

The colour in his face changed though,
when, the ghostly form of a man came
through the heavy door, and passed into
the room before his very eyes, now facing
him. ‘Tknow him, cried Scrooge - ‘Marley's
ghost!’

17
The same face; the very same, but with
a handkerchief wrapped around his head
and chin (was it keeping his jaw from
falling down?). Marley in his pigtail, usual
waistcoat, tights and boots. The chain
he was pulling was tied around his waist
- it was long, and was made of cash-boxes,
keys, and steel padlocks. His body was
transparent.

Scrooge could still not believe his eyes,
even with Marley's death-cold eyes fixed
on him.

"What do you want with me?" said
Scrooge.

‘Much!” - Marley's voice, no doubt
about it.

"Who are you?’

‘Ask me who [ was.’

"Who were you then?” said Scrooge,
raising his voice. "There's something
familiar about you.’

‘In life [ was your partner, Jacob Marley,’
said the ghost. "You don’t believe in me?’

don't,” said Scrooge.

18
19
At this the Spirit made a frightful cry,
and shook its chain with such a noise that
Scrooge held on tight to his chair to save
himself from falling. But how much greater
was his horror when the Spirit, taking off
the bandage round its head, dropped its
jaw upon its chest.

Scrooge fell upon his knees, and held his
hands before his face. ‘Mercy!’ he cried.
‘Oh why are you haunting me?’

'l have come for you’, said the ghost.
'l have come to warn you.’

"Warn me? About what?’ said Scrooge.

‘Here, look’ said the Ghost, pointing to
the chain around him. ‘I made this chain.
I made it when [ was alive. And | made it
from my greed and from my selfishness.
Do you not recognise its cash-boxes?’

"Jacob," begged Scrooge. ‘Old Jacob
Marley, tell me more. Speak to me of a
bright future, Jacob!’

"There is none,” the Ghost replied. ‘I
can only tell you that you too will carry
your own chain if you do not change.

20
I am trapped myself, trapped for ever
- no rest, no peace, and nobody to share
my troubles with. All happiness gone, for
ever and ever.’

‘But you always were a good businessman,
Jacob,’ said Scrooge.

‘Business!’ cried the Ghost. ‘Charity,
mercy and love should have been my
business, Ebenezer.’

‘Hear me!” said the Ghost. ‘My time is
nearly gone, but yours is just beginning.
You will be haunted by Three Spirits.’

'[ cannot ...’, said Scrooge.

"Without their visits’, said the Ghost,
'you cannot change your future; and
you cannot become a better man. The
first will come tomorrow, at one o'clock;
the second on the next night at the same
time; the third on the next night as soon
as you hear the last stroke of twelve. Be
prepared Ebenezer, and remember my
words.’

The Spirit then folded his handkerchief
about his head and walked backwards;

21
and with every step it took, the window
raised itself a little, so that when the ghost
reached it, the window was wide open.
And then it was gone.
Scrooge closed thewindow, and examined

the door by which the Ghost had entered: it
was double-locked, as he had locked it with
his own hands. He tried to say "Humbug!
but stopped himself halfway. And as he was
completely exhausted (it had not, after all,
been a regular day), Scrooge went straight
to bed, without taking his clothes off, and
very quickly went to sleep.

22
Chapter III

"And you shall fly

with me’

23
When Scrooge woke, it was so dark that,
looking out of bed, he could not see his
window. He was trying to focus his eyes on
certain objects in his room when the bells of
a nearby church started to ring. Suddenly
remembering what Marley's ghost had told
him, he listened for the hour, counting.

The clock rang Twelve.

He still, thankfully he thought, had one
hour. So he got out of bed and crawled
to the window. He had to rub the frost
off with the sleeve of his dressing-gown
before he could see anything; even now he
could only see that it was still very foggy
and it was still very cold.

Scrooge went back to bed, and thought,
and thought, and thought. Marley's ghost
bothered him — he could hardly believe
that anyone (and not just anyone for, as you
know, Marley had been dead for seven years)
would come to see him in good faith. So his
mind twisted and turned, and he thought
that it could easily have been just a dream.
Atleast he hoped it had been a dream.

24
‘Ding, dong!’ rang the bell.

'A quarter past,” said Scrooge, counting.

‘Ding, dong!’

"Half -past!” said Scrooge.

‘Ding, dong!’

'A quarter to,” said Scrooge.

‘Ding, dong!’

‘One o'clock, and still nothing,” Scrooge
said, joyfully.

He spoke too soon. When the last bell
rang out, a light instantly flashed up in
the room, and the curtains of his bed were
drawn: they were drawn by a hand. Scrooge
was now face to face with another spirit,
but a different one to Marley's.

It was a strange figure — like a child. Its
hair, which hung around its neck and
down its back, was white like an old man’s;
but the face had not a wrinkle on it, and
it shone with youthful colour. The arms
were very long and strong; the hands the
same. It's legs and chest were bare, but it
wore a coat of the purest white. It also held
some fresh green holly in its hand. But the

25
strangest thing about it was, that from the
top of its head there flashed a bright clear
light, which lit all before it.

‘Are you the Spirit who has come to help
me?’ asked Scrooge, with fear in his voice.

‘Tam!’ The voice was soft and gentle.

"Who, and what are you?" Scrooge
demanded.

‘I'am the Ghost of Christmas Past.’

"Whose past?” asked Scrooge.

Your past,” said the Ghost

‘But why?" asked Scrooge nervously.

‘Because you must understand your past
if you are to change your future.’

The Ghost put out its strong hand as it
spoke, and took him gently by the arm.

‘Rise! And walk with me!’

Scrooge rose; but finding that the Spirit
was walking towards the window, held his
dressing gown tightly.

‘I am human,” Scrooge argued, ‘and [ am
in danger of falling’.

‘Put your hand in mine,” said the Ghost,
‘and you shall fly with me’.

26
As these words were spoken, they went
through the wall, and stood onan open country
road, with fields on either side. The city had
entirely disappeared. The darkness and the
fog had disappeared too, as it was a clear, cold,
wintry day, with snow on the ground.

‘Good Heaven!” said Scrooge, as he
looked around him. ‘I was brought up in
this place. [ was a boy here!’

Scrooge suddenly noticed a thousand
childhood smells hanging in the air, each
one reminding him of thoughts, and hopes,
and joys long, long, forgotten!

They walked along the road until a little
market-town appeared in the distance,
with its bridge, its church, and its own river.
Ponies were seen galloping towards them
with boys on their backs, shouting cheerfully
in the fresh air. As they went round a bend,
they came up to a large brick building that
Scrooge remembered as a school.

"The school is not quite empty,” said the
Ghost. “A child, forgotten by his friends, is
there still.’

27
Scrooge said he knew it. And a tear fell
from his eye.

The Ghost and Scrooge walked in and
across the hall, to a door at the back of the
building. It opened before them as they
walked in. The room was long and empty,
made emptier still by lines of wooden desks
and chairs. At one of these a lonely boy was
reading by a small fire; and Scrooge sat
down upon a chair, and cried to see himself
as he used to be.

‘I wish,” said Scrooge. ‘But it’s too late
now’

"What is the matter?” asked the Spirit.

‘Nothing, said Scrooge. ‘Nothing. There
was a boy singing a Christmas Carol at my
door last night. | should have given him
something: that's all.’

The Ghost smiled thoughtfully, and
waved its hand saying: ‘Let us see another
Christmas!’

Scrooge and the Ghost again stood side
by side in the open air.

‘Ihave little time,” said the Spirit. ‘Quick!’

28
Fr

orn
7

Scrooge again saw himself. But he was
older now; a healthy young man. His face
did not have the hard and stiff lines that he
was to have later on in his life; but it had
begun to show what was to trouble him
later: greed and selfishness.

He was not alone, but sat by the side of a
fair young girl in a black dress. The girl had
been crying as her eyes were watery with
tears.

"You once loved me, Ebenezer. But that
love is gone now. You don't need me
anymore; all you need is money.’

‘But there is nothing worse in this
lonely world of ours than to be poor,” said
Scrooge.

"There is,” replied the girl. "A world
without Love.’

‘But Love alone does not put food on our
table,” said Scrooge, thoughtfully.

"You fear the world too much,” she
answered, gently. "Which is why, with a
full heart, I have to let you go. You have
decided your future and do not need me

30
NG JR
Ef = —
= 7
(5 —— 22, W o =%

31
with you. May you be happy in the life you
have chosen!’

She walked away from him. Scrooge
wanted to call out to her; wanted to hold
her; wanted to be with her, for ever and
ever. But the Ghost explained to him that
these were just memories, shadows of a
world that had been.

‘Please take me home,” cried Scrooge.
"Is it not enough that | have seen my heart
break again?’

At this, the Spirit burned with light and
Scrooge was aware of being exhausted and
back in his bedroom, of being in his own
bed. He instantly fell into a heavy sleep,
dreaming of his younger self.

32
Chapter IV

‘God bless us everyone!’

33
Awakening in the middle of adeep sleep,
and sitting up in bed to get his thoughts
together, Scrooge almost hadn't noticed
the sound of the church bells that had
just rung one. He hoped he might be
better prepared for the second of the
three spirits, and so he pulled at his bed
curtains.

Now, Scrooge was not normally a brave
man, but his first two visitors had made
him ready for any Ghost, he felt: nothing
between a baby and a rhinoceros would
have surprised him!

If he was prepared for anything, he
certainly was not prepared for nothing; so
that when the bells struck one, and nothing
happened, Scrooge began to shake.

Five minutes, ten minutes, a quarter of
an hour went by, but nothing came! Was
he dreaming or had he been dreaming all
along? All this time, he lay on his bed,
which seemed to shine with some sort of
reddish light. Where was this light coming
from? It took some time for Scrooge to

34
realise that the source of this light came
from his sitting room. And so he got up
softly and walked slowly to the door in his
slippers.

The moment Scrooge’s hand was on the
door, a strange voice called out to him by
his name, and asked him to enter. He did as
he was told.

[twas hisownroom. There was no doubt
about that. But it had been transformed
in a surprising way. The walls and ceiling
were hung with living green, so that it
looked a perfect garden; from every part
of which he could see berries shining
in the calm light. The crisp leaves of
mistletoe reflected back the light, like
many mirrors. A great fire went up the
chimney, warming everything before
it. Heaped up on the floor, to form a
kind of throne, were turkeys, geese,
chicken, strings of sausages, mince-
pies, plum-puddings, red-hot chestnuts,
juicy oranges, and bowls of punch, that
made the room clouded with a delicious

35
steam. And on the throne there sat,
comfortably, a Giant, glorious to see,
and holding a torch, from which shone a
reddish light.

‘Come in!" said the Ghost. "Welcome
Ebenezer. Come in!’

Scrooge entered the room, but did not
want to meet the Spirit's eyes.

‘l am the Ghost of Christmas Present,’
said the Spirit. ‘Look at me!’

Scrooge did as he was told. [t was clothed
in one simple green coat with white fur.
[ts chest was bare. It was not wearing any
shoes, and on its head it wore a wreath,
shining with icicles. Its dark brown curls
were long and free; free as its kind face, its
shining eyes, its open hand, its cheerful
voice.

"Touch my coat,” said the Ghost.

Scrooge, knowing what was expected of
him, did so; and held it tight.

The mistletoe, red berries, turkeys,
geese, chicken, meat, sausages, pies,
puddings, fruit, and punch, all suddenly

36
37
disappeared. So did the room, the fire, the
reddish light, the hour of night, and they
stood in the city streets on Christmas
morning.

Despite the cold, and it was very cold,
people were making a rough (but not
unpleasant) kind of music, removing
the snow from the pavement in front of
their houses. Carts were making deep
marks in the snow, criss-crossing each
other along the great streets. The sky
was dark, and the smallest streets were
full of snow, half melted and half frozen.
There was nothing very cheerful in the
climate or the town, and yet there was
cheerfulness in the air. Where was it
coming from? It soon became obvious:
the people who were lifting snow were
happy, calling out to one another from
rooftops, and sometimes even throwing
snowballs.

As Scrooge and The Spirit walked
through the wintry streets of this pleasant
neighbourhood, a true Christmas spirit

38
was in the air: the grocers, the fruit sellers
and even the butchers were still half
open and smelt wonderful (especially the
grocers with special tea and coffee, fruits
and nuts, its sticks of cinnamon and other
spices... its French plums, and much,
much more).

Perhaps it was the generous nature of
the good spirit that gave them direction;
or perhaps it was his sympathy with all
poor men. Whatever it was, they soon
arrived at the four-roomed house of
Scrooge's clerk, Bob Cratchit. And it was
then that Scrooge saw what he had never
seen before, or thought possible: a family
caught in the moment.

They were not very well dressed: their
shoes were far from being water-proof
and their clothes were old. Nor was their
house properly dressed with comfortable
pieces of furniture. Another sign of their
poverty came from the kitchen, where a
goose was cooking instead of the usual
Christmas turkey. But they were happy,

39
grateful, and pleased with one another,
and the time they had together.

Mrs. Cratchit was making the sauce;
their eldest son, Master Peter, was
preparing the potatoes with great energy;
a daughter, Miss Belinda, was sweetening
up the apple-sauce; another, Miss Martha,
was cleaning the cooker; and Bob himself
took his youngest, Tiny Tim, beside him
in a tiny corner at the table, which was
neatly laid out for their Christmas dinner.
As far as Scrooge could see, the only
complaint that this family could have
with life was that Tiny Tim carried a little
crutch with him.

The family sat down at the table, and said
prayers. This was followed by a pause, as
Mrs. Cratchit, looking slowly all along the
knife, prepared to cut the goose; and when
she did, a sound of happiness was heard
around the table. Even Tiny Tim weakly
cried Hurrah!

When they had finished with their

delicious dinner, the table was cleared, the

40
floor swept, and the fire made up. They
sat down by it, ready with a compote of
fruit and some chestnuts. They lifted their
mugs, when Bob proposed:

‘A Merry Christmas to us all, my dears.

God bless us!’

Which they all joined in.

‘God bless us everyone!” said Tiny Tim,
the last of all.

And the scene disappeared before Scrooge’s
eyes.

42
Chapter V

“Jo uncle Scrooge!’

Scrooge and the Spirit found themselves
on the streets again. By this time it was
getting dark, and snowing quite heavily;
and as they walked along, the brightness
of the fires in the kitchens and living rooms
was wonderful. Christmas was in the air,
there was no doubt about it.

And now, without a word of warning from
the Ghost, they stood upon on empty field,
where lots of stones were around. It looked
like a graveyard for giants.

Down in the west the sun was going down
fast, its light changing from golden yellow
to red. A few moments later, it looked at
this untouched view for a second, like a
silent eye; and going lower, lower, lower
again, until darkness fell over the world like
a cold blanket.

"What place is this?" asked Scrooge.

‘A place where miners live, who work in
the earth,” answered the Spirit. ‘But they
recognise me. See!’

A light shone from the window of a hut,
and quickly they moved towards it. Passing

44
through the wall of mud and stone, they found
a cheerful group of people sitting around a
bright fire. An old, old man and woman, with
their children and their children’s children,
and another generation again, all dressed
brightly in their holiday clothes. The old
man was singing them a Christmas song (it
had been a very old song even when he was a
boy) and from time to time they all sang with
him. It seemed as if they sang in time with the
wind's own music outside.

The Spiritdid not stay, butasked Scrooge
to hold his coat, and high above the land,
flew - where?

Not to sea?

To sea.

They flew past ships; they flew past
lighthouses; they flew past islands. But
wherever they saw human life, even on
the seas, the story of Christmas was being
told and re-told: every man either sang
a Christmas carol, or had a Christmas
thought, or spoke quietly to his companion
of some past Christmas day.

46
At last they landed on land itself; and,
again, suddenly Scrooge found himself ina
country house he did not recognise. There
was, however, something about the place
which he recognised.

‘Ha, ha!” laughed a voice he knew well.
‘Ha, ha, ha!’

It was the voice of Scrooge’s nephew.
The room they were in was bright, dry, and
warm. Scrooge turned round and found the
Spirit standing by his side, he too smiling
(everybody, even those without bodies,
felt the cheerfulness in the room).

‘Ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha, ha!’

‘He said that Christmas was a humbug,
as | live!” cried Scrooge’s nephew. ‘He
believed it too!’

‘How sad, Fred!” said Scrooge’s niece,
a little angry. She was pretty, very pretty
too. Scrooge had never met his niece;
had never found time to visit; had never
accepted his nephew's kind invitations.
And now, seeing the good times he
had missed (and the good times he was

47
missing), Scrooge felt a deep pain in his
heart.

‘He's a funny old man,” said Scrooge's
nephew, ‘that's the truth: and not as
friendly as he could be, I feel.’

I'm sure he’s very rich, Fred,” suggested
Scrooge’s niece. ‘At least you always tell
me so.’

‘But do you think money helps him?” said
Scrooge’s nephew. ‘[tis useless to him. He
doesn’t do any good with it. He doesn't
even make his own life comfortable with
it.”

‘I have no patience with him,” said
Scrooge’s niece.

‘Oh, [ have!” said Scrooge’s nephew. ‘l am
sorry for him; [ couldn't be angry with him
if [ tried. Who really suffers from his greed?
Who really suffers from his selfishness? He
does, always.’

"What makes you think he cares?” asked
Scrooge’s niece.

"Well, take his Christmas. He doesn’t visit
us and he certainly doesn’t visit anyone

48
else. | believe that, because of this, he loses
some very nice moments in life. [ am also
sure that his thoughts could never give
him the friendship we all need, either in his
cold office, or in his dark rooms. | would
like to give him the same chance every
year, whether he likes it or not, because |
feel sorry for him. He may think Christmas
a humbug, as he says, but [ am sure that he
can't stop thinking about it, especially if he
sees me, in a good mood, year after year,
and saying, uncle Scrooge, how are you?’

'l suppose you are right,” said Scrooge's
niece.

'Hereisaglass to his healthand happiness,
anyway’ said Scrooge’s nephew, raising a
glass of warm wine for his uncle. ‘I hope
that he may one day find the happiness that
belongs to us all. To uncle Scrooge!’

"Well, to uncle Scrooge!” she agreed,
doing the same.

‘A Merry Christmas and a Happy New
Year to the old man, wherever he is!’ said
Scrooge’s nephew.

50
Scrooge suddenly had a strange feeling of
warmth as he heard these words: words of
hope, words of love. If only he could thank
them for their thoughts and for their toast,
if the Ghost had given him time; instead,
the whole scene disappeared before his
very eyes, and Scrooge once again found
himself travelling.

They saw much more, the Spirit and he.
And travelled far too. But the end was
always the same: happy. The Spirit stood
by sick beds, and they were cheerful, by
hard working men, and they were patient;
by poverty, and it was rich. Wherever
they went, love seemed greater than all
life's worries put together. This truly was
a world where Love could rule, Scrooge
thought. And win.

Scrooge saw all this in only one night, but
it seemed like forever. He noticed, too,
that while he stayed the same, the Spirit
appeared to grow older, clearly older.

‘Are spirits’ lives so short?” asked
Scrooge.

51
‘My life upon this world is very brief,’
replied the Ghost. ‘It ends tonight.’

"Tonight!" cried Scrooge.

"Tonight at midnight. Our time together
is coming to an end.’

And almost as soon as the Spirit had said
this, the bell rang twelve.

They were back in Scrooge’s bedroom
now. Scrooge turned and looked for the
Ghost, but did not see him. Instead, as the
last bell stopped ringing, he remembered
Marley's words and, lifting his eyes, saw
a dark figure coming, like a fog along the
ground, towards him.

52
Chapter V1

The Last of the Spirits

53
The Ghost slowly came towards Scrooge.
When it came near him, Scrooge bent down
and knelt by it. The air around seemed full of
unhappiness. It was wearing a deep black
coat, which hid its face, so that the only
thing that Scrooge could see was his hand.
He felt that the Ghost was tall but he was
too afraid to look up; but that was all he
knew, since the Spirit neither spoke nor
moved. Scrooge only felt fear in his heart.

‘Are you the Ghost of Christmas Future?’
asked Scrooge.

The Spirit did not answer, but pointed
with its hand.

Although Scrooge was used to these visits
by now, he was completely unprepared
for the dark Spirit. His legs grew weak
and started shaking under him. And, as
he prepared to follow the Spirit's hand,
Scrooge found that he could hardly stand.

‘Ghost of the Future!” he cried, I fear
you more than any Spirit | have seen. But
as | know your purpose is to do me good,
and as [ hope to live to be a different man

54
L ——— A \ oR — : = =

from what [ was, [ am prepared to bear your
company, and do it with a thankful heart.
Will you not speak to me?’

It gave him no reply. The hand was
pointing straight before him.

The Ghost moved away as it had come
towards him. Scrooge followed in the
shadow of its dress, which took him up, he
thought, and carried him along.

The city lay in front of them. They were,
in fact, in the heart of it. Merchants hurried
up and down the streets, with the money in
their pockets, and sometimes stopping to
converse with others. The Spirit flew onintoa
narrow street. [ts finger pointed to two people
meeting. Scrooge knew these men, and knew
them well. They were men of business: very
rich, and of great importance.

"How are you?’ said one.

‘How are you?’ returned the other.

"Well!" said the first. ‘Old Scratch has
finally died, hey?’

‘Solam told,’ returned the second. ‘Cold,
isn't it?’

56
‘As usual in Christmas time. You're not a
skater, [ suppose are you?’

‘No. No. Much too busy for that. Good
morning!’

Not another word. That was their meeting,
their conversation, and their parting.

Not knowing what to think about this con-
versation, Scrooge turned towards the Spirit;
and all he was faced with was an outstretched
hand pointing in another direction, this time
intoa poor part of town. [t was Camden Town,
and it had changed since Scrooge knew it: the
ways now were dirty; the shops and houses
falling down; the people half-naked, drunken,
ugly. The whole quarter smelt of crime, of dirt
and unhappiness.

The sad Ghost and Scrooge walked on "till
they reached the house of Bob Cratchit,
Scrooge’s clerk. Scrooge felt as though he
had just visited his clerk's house, but this
time seemed very different. The happiness
and laughter that once filled the house had
changed to bitter unhappiness.

This was the scene that met Scrooge’s

57
eyes: in a corner sat Bob Cratchit crying
like a child, with two of his own children
sitting beside him. Mrs. Cratchit holding
one of them, trying hard to kiss away her
husband's tears. There were no words of
warmth; and there were no voices of hope.
This awful vision was made more painful by
the complete stillness in the scene: nothing
and nobody moved. Scrooge soon saw why
his clerk's family was so unhappy: in the
corner of the room stood an empty chair with
a small crutch leaning next to it. Tiny Tim, the
joy of this family, had been taken from them.

‘Spirit,” said Scrooge, tears beginning to
fill his eyes, ‘why has the child died?’

The Ghost said nothing. The scene had
changed again and this time they were
facing an entrance gate to some overgrown
churchyard. The old iron gate made a
metallic noise as the Spirit moved through it.
Scrooge stood still, and could not follow the
Spirit: a deathly fear had taken hold of him.

The Spirit stood among the graves, and
pointed down to one. Scrooge waited, his legs

58
going dead under him. The finger pointed
from the grave to him, and back again.

‘No, Spirit! [ beg you’ said Scrooge

Still the finger was there.

Scrooge slowly walked towards it,
shaking; and following the finger, read on
the stone of the lonely grave the name:

EBENEZER SCROOGE RIP

‘No, Spirit! O, no, no!’

‘Spirit!” he cried, holding its coat, ‘Hear
me! | am not the man [ was. [ will not be the
man | was! | will honour Christmas in my
heart, and try to keep it all the year. I will
live in the past, the present, and the future.
The Spirits of all three shall live within me.

I will not forget the lessons that they teach.
Oh, tell me [ may clean away the writing on
this stone!’

In his pain, he tried to catch the spirit’s hand.
The Spirit freed itself as soon as Scrooge
moved towards it. Holding up his hands in a
last prayer to have his future changed, he saw
the spirit's hood and coat become smaller
before him, until it fell down on a bed.

60
Chapter VII

“The End of it’

61
Yes! And the bed was his own. The room
was his own. Best and happiest of all, the
Time before him was his own, to change
his wrong ways!

‘I will live in the past, the present, and
the future!” Scrooge repeated, as he was
getting out of bed. “The Spirits of all three
shall live within me. Oh Jacob Marley! God
bless Heaven and Christmas time for this!
| swear it on my knees, old Jacob, on my
knees!’

He was so happy and so shining with good
intentions that the tears on his cheeks were
now tears of joy. For the first time in a very
long time he looked to the future with hope
in his heart.

‘I don’t know what to do!” cried Scrooge,
laughing and crying in the same breath. ‘I
am as light as a feather; | am as happy as
an angel; [ am as merry as a schoolboy, a
Merry Christmas to everybody! A Happy
New Year to all the World!’

And he laughed, and laughed. It really was
a great laugh.

62
'I don’t know what day of the month it
is!" said Scrooge. ‘I don’t know how long
I've been with the spirits. | don’t know
anything. I'm quite a baby; never mind, |
don't care. I'd rather be a baby!’

And then he heard the church bells.
Running to the window, he opened it, and
put out his head. No fog; clear, bright, cold;
cold, fresh air; merry bells. Oh, glorious!
Glorious!

"What's today?” cried Scrooge, calling

down to a boy.
‘Eh?’ returned the boy. "Why, Christmas

Day Sir.’

‘It's Christmas Day!" said Scrooge to
himself. ‘I haven't missed it. The Spirits
have done it all in one night. They can do
anything they like. Of course they can.
Hello, my fine boy!’

‘Hello Sir!’ returned the boy.

‘Do you know the Butchers’, in the next
street at the corner?’ Scrooge asked.

‘Of course 1 do, Sir.’
‘An intelligent boy!” said Scrooge. ‘Do

63
you know if they still have the prize turkey
that was hanging up there?’

"What, the one as big as me?’ returned the
boy.

"What a nice boy!” said Scrooge. ‘It's a
pleasure to talk to him. Yes, my boy!’

' believe it’s hanging there now’ replied
the boy.

‘Is it?” said Scrooge. ‘Go and buy it.’

‘Excuse me?’ said the boy.

‘I mean it,” said Scrooge. ‘Go and buy it,
and tell them to bring it here. Come back
with the man, and I'll give you a shilling.
Come back with him in less than five
minutes and I'll give you half-a-crown!’

The boy was running like a shot.

T'll send it to Bob Cratchit’s!” whispered
Scrooge, rubbing his hands, and laughing.

Scrooge quickly got dressed, and went
downstairs to open the street door, ready
for the boy, butcher and turkey. As he stood
there waiting, the knocker caught his eye.

‘I shall love it, as long as I live!” cried
Scrooge, patting it with his hand. ‘It’s a

64
wonderful knocker! — Here's the turkey!
Hello! Merry Christmas!’

And he paid for it all with a smile, and
patted the boy on the head.

‘A Merry Christmas to you,” repeated
Scrooge. "And a Happy New Year!’

Scrooge left his house and walked down
the street, dancing merrily along the snow-
white streets. Wherever he went it looked
as if a new world had been born, where
people greeted each other, smiled, and
laughed out loud.

He went to church, and walked about
some more, watching people hurrying
along. He patted children on the head; he
talked to the beggars and to the homeless;
he looked into the kitchens of houses,
and up at the windows, and found that
everything could give him pleasure. He
had never dreamed that any walk (that
anything for that matter) could bring him
such happiness. In the afternoon he turned
his steps towards his nephews house.

And he certainly surprised him. And his

66
67
wife. And their friends. Wonderful party,
wonderful games, wonderful happiness!
Scrooge enjoyed himself so much that he
hoped that Christmas would never end.

But he was early at the office the next
morning. Oh, he was early there. If he
could only be there first, and catch Bob
Cratchit coming late! That was his plan.

And he did it; yes, he did! The clock
struck nine. No Bob. A quarter past. No
Bob. He was exactly eighteen and a half
minutes late. Scrooge sat with his door
wide open, so that he might see his clerk
come into the office.

Hello!” said Scrooge, in his angry voice.
"What time do you think it is?’

‘I am very sorry sir,” said Bob, with fear in
his voice.

"You are?’ repeated Scrooge. ‘Come here,
sir, if you please.’

‘It's only once a year, sir,” begged Bob. ‘It
will never happen again sir, please.’

"Well, let me tell you what [ am going to
do,” said Scrooge, watching Bob tremble

68
with fear. ‘I'm going ... I'm going ... I'm
going ... to raise your salary!’

Bob did not know what to think. He just
stood there with his mouth open, not able
to move a finger.

'A Merry Christmas, Bob!” said Scrooge,
as he hugged him. ‘A Merrier Christmas,
Bob, my good man, than I have ever given
you! I'll raise your salary, I'll try and help
your family in any way [| can, and we'll
discuss your situation this afternoon, over
a bowl of Christmas soup, Bob!’

And Scrooge meant it too. He did it all;
and a lot more. To Tiny Tim, who did not
die, he was a second father. He became a
friend to all, and his own heart laughed.
May that truly be said of us, and all of us!
And so, as Tiny Tim once said,

God bless us, everyone!