Romeo and Juliet, William Shakespeare Abridged by Maddie Heyes 
ACT 1 
PROLOGUE 
CHORUS Two households, both alike in dignity, 
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene, 
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny, 
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. 
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes 
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life; 
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows 
Do with their death bury their parents' strife. 
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love, 
And the continuance of their parents' rage, 
Which, but their children's end, nought could remove, 
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage; 
The which if you with patient ears attend, 
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend. 
SCENE 1 – VERONA, A PUBLIC PLACE 
[Enter Sampson and Gregory] 
GREGORY A dog of the house Montague moves me. 
SAMPSON I will bite my thumb at them; which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it. 
[Enter Abraham and Balthazar] 
ABRAHAM Do you bite your thumb at us, sir? 
SAMPSON I do bite my thumb, sir. 
ABRAHAM Do you bite your thumb at us, sir? 
SAMPSON [to Gregory] Is the law of our side, if I say aye? 
GREGORY  No.  
SAMPSON  No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I  
bite my thumb, sir.  
GREGORY  Do you quarrel, sir?  
ABRAHAM  Quarrel, sir! No, sir?  
GREGORY  If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as  
you.  
ABRAHAM  No better.  
SAMPSON  Well, sir, draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy  
swashing blow!  

[They fight. Enter Benvolio] BENVOLIO Part, fools! 
You know not what you do. [Enter Tybalt] TYBALT Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death. BENVOLIO I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword, 
Or manage it to part these men with me. TYBALT What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word, As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee: Have at thee, coward! 
[They fight again. Enter Lord and Lady Capulet, and Lord and Lady Montague] CAPULET What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho! MONTAGUE Thou villain Capulet! – Hold me not, let me go. LADY MONT. Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe. 
[Enter Prince with attendants] 
PRINCE Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Throw your mistemper’d weapons to the ground. 
[They all drop or hide their weapons] 
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, By thee, old Capulet, and Montague, Have thrice disturb’d the quiet of our streets. If ever you disturb our streets again, Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time, all the rest depart away: You Capulet; shall go along with me: And, Montague, come you this afternoon. Once more, on pain of death, all men depart. 
[Exeunt all but Lord and Lady Montague and Benvolio] 
LADY MONT.  O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day? Right glad I am he was not at this fray.  
BENVOLIO  Where, underneath the grove of sycamore That westward rooteth from the city's side, So early walking did I see your son.  
MONTAGUE  Many a morning hath he there been seen, With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.  
BENVOLIO  My noble uncle, do you know the cause?  
MONTAGUE  I neither know it nor can learn of him.  
[Enter Romeo]  
BENVOLIO  See, where he comes: so please you, step aside; I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.  
MONTAGUE  Come, madam, let’s away.  

[Exit Lord and Lady Montague] 
BENVOLIO  Good-morrow, cousin.  
ROMEO  Is the day so young?  
Ay me! sad hours seem long.  
BENVOLIO  What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?  
ROMEO  Not having that, which, having, makes them short.  
BENVOLIO  In love?  
ROMEO  Out –  
BENVOLIO  Of love?  
ROMEO  Out of her favour, where I am in love.  
BENVOLIO  Tell me in sadness, who is it that you love.  
ROMEO  In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.  
[Exeunt]  

SCENE 2 – CAPULET’S HOUSE 
[Enter Paris and Capulet] 
PARIS But now, my lord, what say you to my suit? 
CAPULET My child is yet a stranger in the world; Let two more summers wither in their pride, Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride. 
PARIS Younger than she are happy mother’s made. 
CAPULET Woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart, This night I hold an old accustom'd feast, Whereto I have invited many a guest, Such as I love; and you, among the store, 
One more, most welcome, makes my number more. [Exeunt. Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse with Attendants] 
LADY CAP.  Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me!  
NURSE  I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird! God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet! Juliet! Juliet!  
[Enter Juliet]  
JULIET  How now, who calls? Madam I am here, what is your will?  
LADY CAP.  This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile, We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again; I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel. Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your disposition to be married?  
JULIET  It is an honour I dream not of.  
LADY CAP.  Then, in brief, The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.  
NURSE  A man young lady, such a man!  
LADY CAP.  Speak briefly, can you like of Paris’ love?  
JULIET  I'll look to like, if looking liking move.  
[Enter a Servant]  
SERVANT  Madam, the guests are come! I beseech you, follow straight!  
NURSE  Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.  
[SONG]  

[Exeunt] SCENE 3 – CAPULET’S BALLROOM 
MERCUTIO  Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.  
ROMEO  Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.  
MERCUTIO  You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings, And soar with them above a common bound.  
ROMEO  What lady is that, which doth enrich the hand Of yonder knight?  
PETER  I know not, sir.  
ROMEO  O, Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! For I never saw true beauty till this night.  
TYBALT  This, by his voice, should be a Montague. Fetch me my rapier, boy. This is that villain Romeo, our foe, a villain that is hither come in spite,  
ANTONIO  Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone; Therefore be patient, take no note of him.  
TYBALT  I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.  

[Exit Tybalt and Antonio] 
ROMEO [To Juliet] If I profane with my unworthiest hand This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this: My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss. 
JULIET Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this; 
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss. 
ROMEO Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too? 
JULIET Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer. 
ROMEO O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do; 
NURSE [As they lean towards each other] Madam! Your mother craves a word with you! 
ROMEO Is she, a Capulet? 
MERCUTIO Away, begone. The sport is at its best! 
ROMEO Ay so I fear. The more is my unrest. 
[Exit all but Juliet and Nurse]. 
JULIET Who is that gentlemen who went so fast? 
NURSE His name is Romeo, and a Montague; The only son of your great enemy. 
JULIET My only love, sprung from my only hate. 
[Juliet runs to her room / balcony] 
SCENE 4 – BALCONY 
JULIET Ay me! 
ROMEO But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. She speaks: O, speak again, bright angel! 
JULIET O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo? Deny thy father and refuse thy name; Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, And I'll no longer be a Capulet. 
ROMEO Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this? 
JULIET 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy; What's in a name? that which we call a rose By any other name would smell as sweet. 
ROMEO I take thee at thy word: Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized; Henceforth I never will be Romeo. 
JULIET How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? If any of my kinsmen find thee here, they will murder thee! 
ROMEO I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight; And but thou love me, let them find me here. 
JULIET O gentle Romeo, If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. 
ROMEO Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear, 
JULIET Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract to-night: It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden. Good night, good night! 
ROMEO O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied? 
JULIET What satisfaction canst thou have to-night? 
ROMEO The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine. 
JULIET If that thy bent of love be honourable, Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow, By one that I'll procure to come to thee, Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite. 
NURSE Juliet! Madam! Juliet! 
JULIET A thousand times goodnight! [Exeunt] SCENE 5 – FRIAR LAWRENCE’S CELL [Enter Apothecary and Friar Lawrence] APOTHECARY Within the infant rind of this small flower 
Poison hath residence and medicine power: For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart. 
[Exit Apothecary. Enter Romeo] ROMEO Good morrow, father! FRIAR Where hast thou been? ROMEO I have been feasting with mine enemy, 
and now my heart's dear love is set On the fair daughter of rich Capulet: As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine; And all combined, save what thou must combine By holy marriage; will thou consent to marry us today? 
FRIAR In one respect I'll thy assistant be; For this alliance may so happy prove, To turn your households' malice to pure love. 
[Friar and Romeo move upstage, Juliet enters] SCENE 6 – THE STREET // THE CHURCH [Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, Abraham and Balthazar] MERCUTIO Where the devil should this Romeo be? 
Came he not home tonight? BENVOLIO Not to his father's; I spoke with his man. 
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet, Hath sent a letter to his father's house. BALTHAZAR A challenge, on my life. Is he a man to encounter Tybalt? [They are quiet, upstage:] 
FRIAR Come, come with me, and we will make short work; For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till holy church incorporate two in one. 
[Friar, Romeo and Juliet exit] BENVOLIO I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire: The day is hot, the Capulets abroad, And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl; 
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring. ABRAHAM By my head, here come the Capulets! MERCUTIO I care not! [Enter Tybalt, Gregory, Sampson and Others] TYBALT Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo – BENVOLIO We talk here in the public haunt of men: 
Either withdraw unto some private place, And reason coldly of your grievances, Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us. 
MERCUTIO Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze. [Enter Romeo] TYBALT Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man. 
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford No better term than this,--thou art a villain. ROMEO To such a greeting: villain am I none; 
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not. 
TYBALT  Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.  
ROMEO  I do protest, I never injured thee, And so, good Capulet, be satisfied.  
MERCUTIO  [drawing his sword] O calm, dishonourable, vile submission.  

[First Mercutio and Tybalt begin to fight, then do the rest] 
ROMEO Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath Forbidden bandying in Verona streets: Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio! 
[Tybalt stabs Mercutio from under Romeo’s arm] 
MERCUTIO I am hurt. A plague on both your houses! I am sped. Is he gone, and hath nothing? They have made worms' meat of me. A plague on both your houses! 
[Benvolio carries him off-stage and then re-enters] 
BENVOLIO O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead! 
ROMEO Mercutio's soul Is but a little way above our heads, Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him. 
[Romeo and Tybalt fight. Tybalt dies.] 
ABRAHAM Romeo, away, be gone! The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain. 
BALTHAZAR Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death, If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away! 
[Romeo exits. Enter Prince, Lord and Lady Capulet, Lord and Lady Montague] 
PRINCE  Where are the vile beginners of this fray?  
BENVOLIO  O noble prince, I can discover all: There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.  
PRINCE  Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio; And for that offence Immediately we do exile him hence. Let Romeo hence in haste, Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.  
[Exeunt]  

SCENE 7 – JULIET’S BEDROOM // FRIAR LAWRENCE’S CELL [Enter Juliet and Nurse upstage; Romeo and Friar downstage] JULIET Now, nurse, what news? NURSE Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished; 
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished. JULIET O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood? NURSE It did. JULIET My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain; 
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband. Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death, That murdered me: banished. All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!' 
[They are quiet, upstage: Enter Friar Lawrence] ROMEO Father, what news? what is the prince's doom? FRIAR A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips, 
Not body's death, but body's banishment. 
ROMEO  Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;' do not say 'banishment.'  
FRIAR  Hence from Verona art thou banished. Go to Mantua; Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back With twenty hundred thousand times more joy Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.  
[Exeunt]  

SCENE 8 – CAPULET’S HOUSE 
[Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and Paris] 
PARIS These times of woe afford no time to woo. Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter. 
LADY CAPULET Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled In all respects by us; nay, more, I doubt it not. 
CAPULET Thursday, tell her, She shall be married to this noble earl. 
PARIS My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow. 
CAPULET Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then. Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed, Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day. Farewell, my lord. 
[Exeunt. Enter Juliet] 
JULIET O, by this count I shall be much in years Ere I again behold my Romeo. 
LADY CAP.  O, daughter! Are you up? [Enters] Why, how now, Juliet! Evermore weeping for your cousin's death? What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl. Early next Thursday morn, thou shalt marry The gallant, young and noble gentleman, The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church!  
JULIET  I will not marry yet! [Enter Capulet]  
LADY CAP.  Here comes your father; tell him so yourself.  
JULIET  Good father, I beseech you on my knees, Hear me with patience but to speak a word.  
CAPULET  Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch! I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday, Or never after look me in the face: Speak not, reply not, do not answer me. [Exit]  
LADY CAP.  Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word: Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. [Exit]  
JULIET  O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?  
[Exeunt]  

SCENE 9 – FRIAR LAWRENCE’S CELL [Enter Paris and Friar Lawrence] FRIAR On Thursday, sir? the time is very short. PARIS My father Capulet will have it so. FRIAR Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell. [Enter Juliet] PARIS Happily met, my lady and my wife! 
JULIET  That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.  
FRIAR  My lord, we must entreat the time alone.  
PARIS  God shield I should disturb devotion! Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye: Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss [blows air kiss, then exit].  
JULIET  O shut the door! and when thou hast done so, Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!  
FRIAR  Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope, Which craves as desperate an execution. As that is desperate which we would prevent. Go home, be merry, give consent To marry Paris: Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone; Take thou this vial, being then in bed, And this distilled liquor drink though off; When presently through all thy veins shall run cold. No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest. And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death Thou shalt continue two and forty hours, And then awake as from a pleasant sleep. In the mean time, against thou shalt awake, Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift, And hither shall he come.  
JULIET  Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford. Farewell, dear father!  
SCENE 10 – JULIET’S BEDROOM [Enter Juliet] 


[Exeunt] 
JULIET Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again. I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins, That almost freezes up the heat of life. Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee. 
[She falls, time passes before the Nurse enters] NURSE [She uncovers Juliet and screams] Alas, alas! Help, 
help! my lady's dead! LADY CAP. What noise is here? NURSE Look, look! O heavy day! LADY CAP. O me, O me! My child, my only life, 
Help, help! Call help. [Enter Servants, Gregory, Sampson, Capulet, Paris] NURSE Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him; 
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare To follow this fair corse unto her grave. [Exeunt] SCENE 11 – STREET IN MANTUA [Enter Romeo and First and Second Citizen] 
ROMEO News from Verona! Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? How doth my lady? Is my father well? How fares my Juliet? 
FIRST CIT Her body sleeps in Capel's monument, And her immortal part with angels lives. ROMEO Is it even so? SECOND CIT We saw her laid low in her kindred's vault, And presently took post to tell it you. 
[Exit Citizens] ROMEO Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night. Let's see for means. As I remember, this should be the house. Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. 
What, ho! apothecary! [Enter Apothecary.] APOTHECARY Who calls so loud? ROMEO Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have 
A dram of poison. APOTHECARY Put this in any liquid thing you will, And drink it off; and, if you had the strength Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight. ROMEO Come, cordial and not poison, go with me 
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee. [Exeunt] SCENE 12 – FRIAR LAWRENCE’S CELL [Enter Friar John] FRIAR JOHN Holy friar! brother, ho! FRIAR This same should be the voice of Friar John. 
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo? FRIAR JOHN My speed to Mantua was stay'd as sickness did reign. FRIAR Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo? FRIAR JOHN I could not send it,--here it is again,-­
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee. 
FRIAR  The letter was not nice but full of charge Of dear import, and the neglecting it May do much danger. Friar John, go hence again.  
[Exit Friar John]  
FRIAR  Now must I to the monument alone; Within three hours will fair Juliet wake: She will beshrew me much that Romeo Hath had no notice of these accidents; But I will write again to Mantua, And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.  
[Exeunt]  
SCENE 13 – CAPULET TOMB 


[Romeo standing over Juliet’s body] 
ROMEO Ah, dear Juliet, Why art thou yet so fair? Eyes, look your last! Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss A dateless bargain to engrossing death! Here's to my love! 
[He drinks the poison] 
O true apothecary! Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. 
[Romeo dies. Juliet wakes as he is dying] 
JULIET What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand? Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end: O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop To help me after? O happy dagger! 
[She sees and takes Romeo’s dagger] 
This is thy sheath; 
[Stabs herself] 
there rust, and let me die. 
[She falls on Romeo and dies] 
EPILOGUE 
CHOURS A glooming peace this morning with it brings; The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head: Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things; Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished: For never was a story of more woe Than this of Juliet and her Romeo. 
